# A Phylodynamic Analysis of the Early COVID-19 Spread in the National Capital Region of the Philippines

Imari Joy C. Borda<sup>1</sup>, Sheryl Grace C. Buenaventura<sup>1</sup>, Zython Paul T. Lachica<sup>1</sup>, Ivy Grace M. Panogalinog<sup>1,2</sup>, Ian Lorenzo Quibod<sup>3</sup>, Alexis Erich S. Almocera<sup>1,2</sup>, Lyre Anni E. Murao<sup>1,4</sup>, May Anne E. Mata<sup>1,2\*</sup>, Ricardo C.H. del Rosario<sup>5</sup>

# Abstract

We sought to determine if phylodynamic modeling could describe the early local spread of SARS-CoV-2 in the Philippines and if the model could reflect the government’s control interventions. We applied widely used phylodynamic models to analyze 75 publicly available SARS-CoV-2 genomes sampled from 13 March to 27 July 2020 in the National Capital Region (NCR) of the Philippines. These models allowed us to estimate the date when the virus was introduced in NCR, the effective reproduction number (R<sub>e</sub>), the basic reproduction number (R<sub>0</sub>), and the effective population size (N<sub>e</sub>). The model showed that the first case in NCR was on 23 December 2019 (95% Highest Posterior Density (HPD): 16 November 2019 – 12 January 2020) with R<sub>0</sub> of 1.45 (95% HPD: 1.33 – 1.62). Both R<sub>e</sub> and N<sub>e</sub> suggested an accelerated epidemic expansion on 15 May 2020 (95% HPD: 26 April 2020 – 30 May 2020), roughly coinciding with the date when the government transitioned from enhanced community quarantine (ECQ) to the more relaxed modified enhanced community quarantine (MECQ). We also estimated that there was underreporting in the cases with only about 21.24% of the actual cases being detected per day. Additionally, we demonstrated that non-phylodynamic epidemiological models using reported data may yield underestimated epidemiological parameters and trajectories. The insights from the different phylodynamic models were reasonable, demonstrating that, even with limited viral genomic data, phylodynamic modeling can still provide useful insights about SARS-CoV-2. In summary, our results show a general view of the early-stage spread of COVID-19 in NCR. Our study will serve as a conceptual framework for the use of SARS-CoV-2 genomic data in inferring epidemiological parameters to inform public health decisions in the Philippines.
